The broader Swire group. I don't know, Jan, if we had a chance
to provide a slide on the screen, but in shortly-
I'll just share them with the
clerk.
Great. Okay, thank you. In short, the Swire group is a
conglomerate with activities in many areas across property,
aviation,
beverages, healthcare, trading, and shipping.
And in fact, shipping is the oldest part of the group.
150 years ago,
we started many of our shipping activities.
And that includes a lot of logistics and shipping activities here in New
Zealand, both domestically and also internationally.
I've been based in Singapore now. I'm a Kiwi.
In fact, I grew up on Tinakori Road, not far away.
Very good.
Welcome home.
Thank you very much, and enjoyed living next to Premier House for many years when
it was vacant back in the 1990s, and I understand it's different these
days. But
traveled down from Singapore last night along with Ben, who
lives in Singapore as well. I've been based there for 18 years now
and was very interested to attend today's select
committee,
both as the CEO for Swire Shipping,
but also as a Kiwi, as a CEO
based in Singapore with particular concerns
for a couple of reasons. Firstly, I think as running a global
shipping business
in Singapore, it allows us to sit
on a number of industry maritime boards, industry
groups.
And again, Singapore now a major global hub.
Bringing those things together, I think gives us direct exposure to global policy
settings in the space and industry trends.
And the trends we see, which I'll share a little bit on shortly,
I think are in direct contrast to many of the trends that we're seeing here in New
Zealand.
If I may share with the select committee, one of the loudest and consistent
themes that we see at the moment across the global maritime
industry is a deliberate shift around all things to do with
supply chain resilience.
And this is no longer rhetoric. I see in many cases it's becoming quite a
deliberate and a direct response to the pandemic, obviously some years ago,
military conflicts, rising geopolitical tension.
Quite specifically, we see this in two different areas.
Firstly, within our customers, we see the advent of chief supply chain
officer roles,
that became very in vogue over COVID, and many years later,
they are now, I think, a permanent fixture.
We're seeing governments move
to take increasingly strategic and national view of their
supply chains and shipping vulnerability.
If I can give a few examples, in the US,
famously, looking at investing a lot into its own
domestic shipping industry at the moment.
But if we look beyond the US and the politics there, China,
Japan, Korea, Vietnam, all actively
revitalizing at the moment their shipping sector.
India is investing at scale, both-
So just to be clear, this is their domestic internal shipping sector?
Correct. That's correct. And in some cases, that includes shipbuilding, and
some cases it's purely focused just on the operator.
Closer to home, the Australian government, as many of you will be aware, have also
seen the need in investigating investments into what
they'd coin a strategic fleet, which looks to address
risks over natural disaster and broader, I think, resilience concerns that
they may have.
The concern I think we have is against this backdrop, it does appear, at least,
that in New Zealand we are taking a slightly different approach with
heightened vulnerability, particularly evident now with the energy crisis.
It does not appear, at least, that the same recognition and the same importance of
the role that the coastal maritime sector plays on this
overall resilience challenge, and we'd like to share some thoughts on that today.
But my second point, I guess this brings us on to relate specifically to our
interests in Pasifika Shipping here in New Zealand,
and for any other potential domestic shipping operator
now or in the future. We've made two submissions
or many submissions, as you said, Mr.
Chair, and I think I'd like to draw attention today to three
core areas, if I can draw out of those two submissions, and then look forward to
taking questions.
The first point is around Section 198 of the Maritime
Transport Act, which in our view materially favors international
shipping companies. These operators
benefit from scale, and they benefit from
costs of having foreign crews paid substantially less than New Zealand
crews, allowing them to offer lower shipping prices in the short term.
Pasifika Shipping or any other New Zealand flag competitor, frankly cannot
compete over the long term on these terms.
We and many other domestic carriers need to have a level playing field, and that
environment doesn't exist today.
Let me share a few reasons why. Some mainline operators we refer to, or MLOs, as
referred to in our papers, have a significant cost advantage.
We estimate that to be about $11 million NZD
per annum per ship.
This committee, we think, needs to confront this trade-off
directly. MLOs may offer cheaper rates, but
service reliability is notoriously unreliable, and
commercial decisions are often made offshore with little regard, we think, for
domestic issues here in New Zealand.
What we have seen in the past is when economic or operational conditions change,
capacity is often pulled away from New Zealand. This is not theoretical.
It is happening repeatedly.
Secondly, Section 198 perhaps anticipates
that some of these structural differences and therefore aims to
restrict the international carriers to incidental
"volumes" only.However, as committee members
will see from our submission,
this is quite the opposite. A majority, we estimate about
75 or 70 to 75% of New Zealand's coastal shipping volume is now
carried by international shippers exploiting this
incidental exemption.
We submit that when the
definition was first established, it was quite possibly never the
intent of Parliament, of course, for this exemption to dominate New
Zealand's coastal shipping capacity.
We recognize that wholesale legislative review of Section
198 would possibly be a slow and cumbersome process.
We believe, however, that considerable progress can be made through
non-legislative means, and that would go some way in addressing this
unintended consequence.
Useful incremental rebalancing steps that do not require
legislation are set out in our submission.
Drawing attention to a few of those points, we would recommend the clarification of
the meaning of incidental through regulation.
Monitoring of coastal trade volumes, respectively carried by
domestic versus international ships by Maritime New Zealand, which
already has monitoring experience and capability for shipping of all
types.
And then promulgating by regulation a practical threshold for
incidental volumes, above which
consideration should be given to
developing a levy, possibly designed to equalize the
regulatory impost of international and domestic shippers.
So we stress in our submission that these measures do not require
or presuppose any relitigating of the fundamentals of the cabotage
regime in New Zealand.
Secondly, I'd like to draw attention to the Emission Trading Scheme.
The Emission Trading Scheme in a coastal shipping context costs
Pasifika Shipping in the order of $1.7 million per year, while
international competitors, as you're aware, carrying domestic cargo
incur no such equivalent charge. This creates a clear,
ongoing, and entirely avoidable competitive distortion.
We'd certainly urge all parties in the committee to support
moves to establish a level playing field in that respect.
Thirdly, and very importantly, is not related to
shipping as such, but related to the efficient and reliable port
operations, which are a absolutely necessary precondition, we
believe, for viable coastal shipping.
We don't think this is a nice to have. It really is an operational imperative.
If you can imagine a large ship, a large container ship, sailing
to Asia, Singapore, for example, with a transit time of about 18 days,
versus a coastal ship, Pasifika Shipping, sailing between Auckland and Lyttelton
with a transit time of two days.
A 12-hour delay in a port of Auckland, for example, which is not uncommon,
represents over 25% of the voyage to Lyttelton, making it
almost impossible to recover that time without significant cost of
omitting ports, speeding ships up, or doing other things that have a
major impact to customers or the
financial viability of the business.
Whereas it represents, of course, only less than 3% of a ship sailing to
Asia. And from our experience running both in international and
domestic shipping services, that is a very manageable cost
that can be dealt with much more easily.
Delays have a material different cost and schedule
impact. As a result, key ports, particularly in
Auckland, need to be encouraged, we believe, to prioritize coastal shipping
where required.
This is explicitly recognized in some jurisdictions, such as Australia
and the US,
whereas it is not recognized here in New Zealand.
We would recommend that the committee examines this point with the aim of
establishing a framework that encourages and supports
the ports to be able to provide coastal shipping operators with
some form of preferential treatment that are required operationally and
commercially, for the reasons I just mentioned.
We'd also support the expansion of Maritime New Zealand's oversight role
to monitor the efficiency and the appropriateness of port operations
for domestic coastal shipping capacity in the future.
Finally, I would like to acknowledge the positive intent
behind the Coastal Shipping Resilience Funds announced by
successive governments 2022, and more recently, obviously
this year, '25, '26. While structurally different,
I think both have recognized that there are real issues here to be
addressed. Our concern is that to date,
Pasifika Shipping has been largely unable to access the latest support in
2026, despite being one of the largest domestic coastal shipping
operators, for the reasons mentioned above, one
exposed to a lot of the current structural settings.
So in summary, Swire Shipping, as a shareholder for Pasifika, are
absolutely committed to playing a constructive role
in this debate to make coastal shipping viable in New Zealand.
We believe the proposals in our submissions are practical.
We think they're pro-competition. We think they're pro-business.
They're also environmentally sensible.
The committee will be aware that
many reports that have been conducted in the past suggest that coastal shipping is
somewhere between six, seven, or eight times more environmentally friendly
than our road or rail competitors.
However, as shareholders of Pasifika Shipping in
Singapore, we cannot wait indefinitely.
We are facing critical and imminent decisions
around our future participation on the coast of New
Zealand. We therefore urge the committee to consider our recommendations.
And in summary, in particular, that's a regulatory clarification
around incidental under Section 198, together with
monitoring considerations that we have
suggested.Secondly is urgent attention to the role that
the ports play in supporting coastal shipping through appropriate
monitoring and oversight, possibly by Maritime New
Zealand. Thirdly, is a level playing field with
respect to the emission trading scheme, ETS, between domestic and
international shippers.
And then fourthly, in support of
asking for your support in principle for emergency relief to
allow vital domestic coastal shipping capacity to be
preserved in the face of this unleveled playing field and supply chain
concerns.
That is all we wanted to cover today.
We hope that's drawn out the main points from our various submissions.
We thank you sincerely for the time today.
I think our presence here from Singapore hopefully reinforces the
criticality we see of the situation, and look forward to taking any
questions. Thank you.
Thank you very much. I've got a bunch of questions, but I'm going to start
off with Tangi.
Oh, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you for making the effort of traveling back home.
So welcome back.
And thank you for the service
to New Zealand since 1985 in terms of domestic freight that you've
identified in your submission. As you
point out, last year the decision was made
by the government that did clarify the intent under
Section
1981C and purely around that protection of
local commercial interests.
So with that in mind,
my question is about capacity. So if
there is a
regulatory change that would effectively see that just under
48% of cargo being carried by those MLOs,
that still needs to be carried. But what's the sort of focus on
capacity from non-MLOs to be able to continue to
be able to deliver that or take up that uplift in
capacity?
I think to some extent the suggestions that we
are making with respect to the Section 198 itself, but also
the suggestions around the ports go hand in hand.
In order for coastal shipping to provide more capacity,
either through more competitive
entrance to the market or through Pacifica as the incumbent increasing
the size of its ship or the number of ships to increase the frequency of
service, we need
support from the ports. More space in the ports allows bigger ships or more ships
to be calling into the ports. So unless we can
address both the port issue and the definition of incremental hand in
hand, then it's difficult to build the capacity around coastal shipping,
which is one of the key reasons we try to bring these two
issues together. But if I could think
far beyond that to a situation where the ports,
in the case of Pacifica we talk about Auckland and Lyttelton, but I think it really
applies to any of the ports.
As happens in many other countries around the world, if there is a framework that
allows them to prioritize coastal shipping,
then we would quickly see an
increase in frequency of ships. At the moment, coastal
shipping is about once per week. Many rail options
per day, many trucks options per hour.
So the best way to increase that frequency would be to have a ship
two times a week or three times a week, ultimately one ship
a day between Auckland and Lyttelton.
The key constraint to that is access to port space
and access to the changes to the incident
definition.
Can I just have one other question?
And you touched on the issue of service reliability
for the MLOs.
My question is what, if any, implications are there for your
operations when you have a significant amount of
domestic coastal shipping being carried by MLOs that
have scheduling issues around service reliability?
What, if any, of the implications are-- because as part of this inquiry we've
become very attuned to slots and times and all of this sort of stuff.
Mm-hmm.
So if there is this unreliability, what are the
implications for your operations, if any?
Well, if I perhaps can answer that through the
eyes of what many of our customers tell us, who are
using both Pacifica Shipping as often the backbone to their
operation, but then using some of their incremental volumes on the
mainline carriers.
It's exactly that. They need
for their own supply chain resilience to have certainty for whatever
percentage of their cargo it is, and they know that Pacifica Shipping is there
every week.
What they have seen through the use of the mainline operators then is that there
can be periods of a few months or longer where there are
several options per week. The frequency is high, the price may be very
competitive,
but then things change overnight.
And so from a Pacifica Shipping perspective, answering your question, we find that
very difficult to deal with because we cannot scale up and scale down very
quickly to accommodate the flip-flopping of volumes that
occurs sometimes. So it's difficult for Pacifica as well.
If we had more certainty
around... Sorry, let me rephrase that.
If we could also avoid the unreliability,
then Pacifica has more certainty
to the extent that it can upsize its size of ship, its frequency of ship,
to provide more and more frequency, or more and more capacity.
I guess my question is also around
if you've got an MLO that's scheduled into a particular port, and the
reliability of that service around timeliness is not accurate,
does that have implications, for example-
I see
... that you need toYou know, wait before you can come in or you have
to leave early and you're not at, those sorts of things.
Sorry, I missed that point. But absolutely, the answer to that is yes.
It's probably one of our highest frustrations,
is again, not being afforded any preferential treatment.
Oftentimes will mean that ships need to wait at Auckland or Tauranga or Lyttelton
for hours or days, I think, Jan, on many occasions behind
a coastal ship. Which is why we draw attention in this brief summary before to
the importance of an hour lost
for Pacifica Shipping is
a major issue. An hour lost for someone that's got an 18-day voyage into
Asia-
Yeah
... is far less of an issue.
Okay. Thank you.
Okay. Dan's asked to go down the list, so I'll go next with a few
questions. Just in terms of the
model as it works at the moment with an MLO, can you just walk us through this?
Because what we're seeing is,
and the group that we haven't yet heard from is
the major shipping lines. So, and we're trying to get
them in as well because that's an important part of the puzzle.
So we know that we're getting larger ships coming, which
some of our ports can't take. So
I'm really interested in how, because what you're talking about is you've got
competition for these MLOs coming in and essentially hopping their way through the
country. So I'd like you to talk us through how that works, both what they're
dropping off, but also what they're picking up and potentially dropping off
somewhere else within New Zealand.
So, to what degree are they simply bringing product in from
overseas and dropping it at various different ports?
Mm-hmm.
And to what extent are they picking things up from a New Zealand port and then
dropping it off at another New Zealand port-
Mm-hmm
... without, so that they're doing that.
Second thing is, in terms of the hub and spoke model, which you've talked about,
as you get those bigger ships, that's going to drive us towards more hub and spoke,
which I would have thought is an opportunity for Pacifica,
because they can't do it. So can you just walk us
through how that works?
And also you've mentioned in one of your submissions
having one port in the north and one port in the south.
I just wondered how that works because I can see some real challenges in
that. And also challenges, you mentioned resilience, challenges in terms of
resilience. I mean, for example, if there was one port in the South Island that was
Lyttelton-
Mm-hmm
... and we had another earthquake-
... we've got a bit of a problem.
Mm-hmm.
So how do we work that
model as well? So there's three or four questions in there.
Sure.
Let me firstly share some thoughts on how we
see the
MLO model working firstly. So I think
it's correct to say that,
typically the MLOs will design their service structure around the majority
of New Zealand's container imports being discharged in Auckland.
And the ships will come in, they'll discharge majority of their containers in
Auckland. They'll then move their way around the New Zealand coast
to different ports, and typically that would include one port in the South Island,
Lyttelton or Port Chalmers. And then oftentimes the ships will come back
up and load the export
cargo in Lyttelton, but also Tauranga.
So if we imagine a typical service structure might be discharge your
imports to New Zealand and Auckland, go to one or two other, maybe
more ports in New Zealand, and then finish in Tauranga,
which is New Zealand's largest export port still, and sail back into
Asia.
Where that interfaces, and in the large part, the mission of
the mainline operators is to do exactly that, carry import,
international import cargo and international export cargo from New
Zealand.
Okay.
Where that overlays with Pacifica, for example, is from Auckland to
Lyttelton, where the main line carriers are going to Auckland to
discharge cargo, they're going to Lyttelton to pick up export cargo, and then on
that one sector in the middle, they can compete with
Pacifica Shipping.
So what you're saying is they're picking up cargo in Auckland to take to
Lyttelton?
Yes. And that cargo may be true domestic cargo in New Zealand.
It may be cargo that's been imported and remanufactured perhaps in Auckland
and then redistributed domestically.
So can you just spell out for us what that percentage
of the domestic cargo actually is?
Because that's
the area of direct competition, isn't it?
Well-
I mean, because if they're bringing something in from, let's say Singapore, and
they're dropping the first set of containers in
Auckland, then they've got another set to drop in,
well, let's say it's Lyttelton, let's say it's Port Chalmers, whatever it might be.
That in a sense is them just coming to New Zealand and dropping things
off.
Yeah.
So this is they're picking things up in Auckland and then dropping them off in-
Yeah
... Lyttelton. That's a bit different.
So if we look at the
overall freight task in two contexts, one is the true domestic cargo,
Auckland to Lyttelton. We then look at it secondly as the
cargo that needs a domestic shipping leg as part of an
international import or export, so call it transshipment
cargo. The share that Pacifica has versus
global carriers of the domestic cargo yard is about
50%.
Mm-hmm.
The share that Pacifica has of the international
transshipment cargo, I think is less than 10%. Yeah.
18.
And that brings me on, Mr. Chair, to the second part of my response to your
question, which is the model, what role does
Pacifica Shipping play in the broader international
context? And it is very common. In fact, it's
an emerging trend globally, and we see in New
Zealand at the moment for many shipping companies to move to a hub and spoke
method. And I know it's been talked about in many committee submissions as well,
and we see that in New Zealand as well.
Pacifica Shipping's role is quite different year on
year, but one way or another, Pacifica Shipping's always playing a
roleProviding cargo or moving cargo from ports
that the international shipping companies don't call at, to Tauranga, for example,
or to Auckland, where there may be transhipping.
And that is the second critical role that Pacifica plays.
It allows the MLOs that are both competitors
and partners of Pacifica to be much more flexible
in how they set up their networks in New Zealand.
If I can talk a bit about the resilience question you asked me,
if we use Christchurch, Lyttelton as example,
you are quite right that the service is
heavily dependent on successful operations of
two ports in this case.
However, if we look at the history, the recent history of Lyttelton as well, it is
constantly changing Auckland and/or Lyttelton.
Sorry. And/or Tauranga, North Port as well.
Lyttelton, Yan and/or Timaru. So there are very
few reasons that the shipping services Pacific cannot move between
ports to suit the best regional requirements.
Overall, the design of Auckland to Lyttelton, because that's where the majority of
the volume resolves at the moment.
I think where I was going is that there are
some ports who would try and aspire to essentially cut the other's lunch.
Yes.
And potentially, if you do that, then eventually-
Mm
... you lose a certain amount of capacity out of any given port.
Yeah.
Or demand from any given port, they're going to stop operating.
Yeah
Because they can't keep going for indeterminate time if they haven't got enough
trade to do it. Then you don't have that choice as a shipping line of going to a
port which no longer has a container port.
An example, I know Timaru was on your list.
Yes.
If Fonterra decided they wanted to send their product to
Lyttelton or to Port Chalmers,
that container port would
lose 85, 90% of its business.
Mm.
Would stop operating as a container port.
If we look at it from an operating model perspective, this is where the combination
of domestic and international intermodal cargo is
critical for Pacifica's ability to provide the best
of both to the New Zealand economy.
So in order for Pacifica to be a
flexible transshipment operator from any one of the ports we
just mentioned, either because of
natural disaster vulnerability or economic changes that you referred to,
Mr. Chairman, it
also needs a thriving domestic business.
And one follows the other. So if
some of the ideas in the submission
are adhered to, it makes the domestic business stronger, then allows more capacity,
more ships to be added into the coastal scene, which then allows those same
competitors, Pacifica and others, to be more flexible for the international
exports as well.
So just to finish mine off before I go to Simon and then to Dan.
So if we're going down to the more hub-and-spoke model
because there are a fewer number of ports which are able to cope with the large
ships, and you think of those ports, you might say, well, clearly
Auckland, probably North Port, if need be Tauranga.
Wellington might be able to. But there'll be some ports which won't
be able to cope with the bigger ships, and so they will get bypassed.
That
must be an opportunity for Pacifica to pick up
that movement, wherever it might be
from, whether it's from Nelson or
Southport or whatever it might be, to be able to take service to
a final export port.
Yeah, absolutely. And particularly interisland.
Pacific is obviously realistic about intra island competition within the North
Island,
road and rail, but certainly interisland, Nelson, Timaru, or Chalmers,
Lyttelton. I think it's absolutely the--
It is unlikely that all of those ports can accommodate the larger vessels in the
future, so they will need a vibrant coastal shipping option as
well.
So are you trying to
argue essentially that you've got a problem at the moment, but if you look through
that problem at some point in time as ships get larger, as we go
towards a more hub-and-spoke model.
As I said, we've yet to have the major shipping lines in front of us,
the major MLO lines in front of us. That that's a
good place for Pacifica to be.
We think that the domestic component of Pacifica's overall
operating model is key to its ability to work with the
MLOs now and
in the future to be more flexible for whatever their feeder
requirements may be. And so principally, our suggestions here are around trying
to fix the domestic component of it.
Our experience over many years, decades now, has been unless we can make the
domestic component work, it's difficult to be flexible enough
on the international component as well.
So yes, our suggestions here around
the three suggestions we make are fix the domestic side of it long
term. We see the short-term issues we're facing at the moment
are equal part regulation, equal part the economic issues in New
Zealand.
But yes, we do see the hub-and-spoke model is a positive opportunity for
coastal shipping generally in New Zealand.
So your argument effectively is to say
that to the MLOs, you can't pick up freight in a New Zealand port
destined for another New Zealand port.
We think the majority of that needs to move on coastal shipping services, and
incidental volumes of that continue to move on the mainland operators.
Simon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
So you've provided some really interesting challenges for policymakers.
Some of the things you're asking for look like protection.
Quite challenging for a government that wants to open markets.
So I'm interested,
what do you think
is the correct policy responseThat avoids
protectionism, but gives you the most
ability to grow your business and deliver more freight
locally.
I think-
Is it the immigration settings? Is it recognizing the qualifications of foreign
workers? Is it port transparency?
Is it a combination of things?
I think of the three things we talk about in
the discussion today,
I think the two that
provide the most impact
on a thriving coastal shipping
long term is addressing and
monitoring incidental, for the reasons that I mentioned before, which refers
to Section 198. So making sure that most domestic cargo moves on
domestic carriers. But secondly, to the ports.
And if the ports are provided with an ability
to prioritize operation, as we mentioned before, coastal shipping,
then I think that in itself will encourage the market
for Pasifika Shipping and for anyone else who competes with Pasifika Shipping in
the future
to operate on a much stronger footing.
Okay.
That sounds quite interventionist.
We've heard from other submitters that some ports'
productivity is much lower
than it should be.
It's been pointed out to the committee that Port of Auckland's productivity is
significantly down on what it was pre-2020.
They've never recovered
from pre-COVID, potentially for a number of reasons.
They failed or attempted automation,
and an increased focus on
workers at the expense of seeking productivity
gains.
It can be debated, but
how much do you think New Zealand's missing a trick when it comes to introducing
technologies like AI and
productivity-enhancing tools?
Well, you're quite right. The productivity of New Zealand ports is low regionally.
We operate international services.
We see that not just in Australia and Asia, but even some of the Pacific Islands.
I think the productivity then in these ports then is
higher than it is in some New Zealand ports.
So we look at two reference points.
We look at that, and we then look at prior to 2020,
as you said, in the case of Auckland, for example, where the productivity was
higher for the reasons you outlined.
Even if we were back to those productivity levels,
the points we make in the paper around having some sort of framework to
go above and beyond that are still critical for coastal shipping.
Okay. Thanks.
Dan.
Thanks Jeremy for your paper and coming before us today, and welcome
home.
Thank you.
Yeah, I guess there's two parts to my questions.
The first is, this is an inquiry to look at improving the
productivity of the sector.
And so I guess one straight off the bat
question is what are your recommendations to us
other than, okay, you've got section 198 and the other
recommendations.
What do you think are the
top three priorities that we should be considering in
our final report to improve the productivity of the sector?
Would be my first question to you.
The three points in our
discussion today are absolutely the three
points that I dearly hope make it through to the recommendation of this
committee.
I hope I made it clear before the problems we're facing at the moment
in terms of the viability of Pasifika Shipping.
We want Pasifika Shipping to be here long term.
We have some very imminent decisions to make this year.
The ship is due to go to a five-year dry docking
which needs to be done in China because we don't have the facilities in New Zealand
in August.
September, we need to take decisions in the next few months, and without
some favorable understanding of these three key policy settings moving
forward,
that's not possible for Pasifika.
Thank you.
So we're very clear about the three things.
There are many other things that I think would be
recommendations of ours as well, but we've tried to be very specific on the three
key ones.
Is there any insight you can give as to whether
Pasifika or Swire Shipping has thought about more
integration along the value chain, so maybe yourselves getting
into the international cargo-
Yes
... so that you are able to exploit the potential cost
advantages that?
So two responses to that. We first and
foremost employ around 60 New Zealand
seafarers on the Pasifika service that have been
a key part of our service now for many, many years.
So it was not our intention to try and exploit the rules around
that. We have looked at ways that given we do operate
international services, not just to Asia and Australia, but also the Pacific
Islands, if there's some way that we can incorporate those services in conjunction
with our employment of the New Zealand seafarers to somehow find a
better solution. But in short, that is very difficult because Pasifika
needs reliability, the customers need the reliability, and as
soon as you start blending it with international services and you start
confronting the problems we mentioned in ports before with delays, quite rightly,
and productivity, you make that challenge even more difficult.
Mm.
So extending the coastal shipping into an international service,
we don't think as
an alternative to
the current model, we don't think is viable.
Thank you. And lastly, around the capitage, you've estimated an
annual cost advantage of around 5.5
million per year per vessel. Are you able to kind of, I
know this is public, but give us a
A sense of the breakdown of that.
Mm-hmm.
Is it because of labour cost? Is it because of the larger, more
efficient modern vessels? Can you give us a sense of
how does that actually split out?
We actually have a very specific breakdown of that, which we have the
Thank
you. So it's 10.9 million New Zealand dollars, which we break
down to $3.1 million is the additional cost of
having to purchase fuel oil in New
Zealand at a higher price than the international markets.
$6 million is the extra operating cost
of a dedicated New Zealand ship, which includes crewing,
which is obviously a significantly higher, big part of that $6 million is
maintenance. And then $1.7 million is due
to the emission trading
scheme fees that I touched on before.
So that's a total of 10.9.
That's very helpful. Thank you.
Okay. A
few more questions I've got there.
First one of them is just in terms of efficiency of ports. How do you measure that?
Because we've had a number of different measurements that have been suggested to
us. What's your measurement effectively as a
customer of a port?
The number of containers that are moved per hour,
and that's reliant on two factors.
Of course, one is the
number of cranes that the port has to improve the
productivity.
Mm-hmm.
And then secondly is the size of the ship, and generally speaking, the larger the
size of the ship-
The more cranes
... the higher the productivity.
Yep. Okay. That's helpful because some of them it's been the
crane product. Well, it's all very good.
If you put one crane on, you could put three on.
Exactly.
So it's obviously not going to be quite as quick.
So essentially it's getting you in and out as quick as possible is the key.
Exactly.
Just in terms of that efficiency, we've also had some comments made around, and by
this for a number of different ... I know the unions in the back there, and it's
the same union as both your seafarers and your on land.
The flexibility to be able to turn ships around faster.
So they arrive when they arrive. It might not be the right slot, but
the ability for the ports and the unions to work together to actually go, "Right,
we need to get this in, and we need to get it out as quickly as possible." Because
there's obviously a cost to having those ships not there.
It's a cascading cost
as slots get mucked around-
Mm
... later on in the journeys. What do you see in terms of that flexibility?
From a shipping company perspective,
we are very happy with the collaboration between the ports and the
crew on board our ships. The key
issues are the two we've discussed today.
One is firstly, is there a delay getting into port to start off with, which
typically is hours or sometimes days, not minutes.
And then secondly is the productivity of the cranes and the port themselves.
So they are the two issues that underpin our concerns here when we
refer to ports.
Collaboration closer to home between our own ship, for instance, and the
port and other people on the port is not a key concern of
ours.
Okay. So you see there's enough flexibility that's being, if you need something,
you get it.
Maybe I don't understand the question.
Well, if you turn up at an hour which there's
not sufficient staffing at the port.
Oh, I see.
Do they say, "Well, right, okay, we need to get people in there and
help you move?" Or do they just say-
Labour availability. Is that a-
... "Wait till tomorrow," sort of thing?
No, I think it is an issue at times.
It probably
is related to
potential delays of the vessels that precede us in the port.
Mm.
So
overall, that is having an impact on delays
for Pacific Shipping.
Yeah, because we certainly heard that loud and clear that you can't necessarily
legislate for when ships are going to arrive, and if they don't arrive on the time
they were expected to because of whatever, storms, whatever it might have been.
Mm.
If they then turn up, several of them turn up together, somebody's
waiting out in the channel.
Somebody-
That's exactly what you're calling the flexibility to recover from those
delays in a timely
That's what I'm asking about, is whether you see sufficient flexibility in the
ports and in the
crewing of the ports themselves
to respond to those situations.
I think this is where we do sort of see issues.
I mean, we work very closely with the ports.
Mm-hmm.
And we have windows set in the ports.
So we're supposed to arrive, for example, seven o'clock on a Thursday.
That was my point. If you miss your window, for whatever reason,
how do you catch it up again?
Yeah. So we're regularly talking to the ports in those situations.
But we also see situations where we arrive on time, and then there's
other ships on the berth-
Because they've missed their window
... and other ships waiting for the berth, and then we need to sort of join a queue
to get the berth.
So that's what I'm asking about is, is there sufficient ability within the ports
and that with everybody that plays in the ports, whether that's both the ports as
an operation, whether it's the
staff that run the ports, the unions, et cetera.
Is there sufficient ability to be able to say, "Hey, look, drop everything.
Let's get in there and sort this problem out.
There's a queue here."
Yeah, I think there's a tightness in capacity in the ports.
Correct.
So when we're facing these issues, we do sometimes have to join this queue.
Mm-hmm.
And that's part of our ask here as well, is because of the impact on a
coastal domestic service, we just can't afford to sit and wait for 6 or
12 hours. That really sort of has a major impact.
So one of the asks here is trying to find some way of dealing with
coastal shipping services in a manner that's required
to sustain a coastal shipping service.
So if we do join a queue, for example, well, actually, because of the nature
of domestic services, maybe actually we should have a priority in berthing
when the delay is not caused by anything that we've
done.I guess the problem we've got is that for whatever reason,
if you've got a number of different vessels from different lines,
and you're asking us to say, "Well, pick us before them,"
somebody is suffering somewhere, and there'll be consequences for somebody
else and their customers and so on as well.
So ideally, you're trying to fix that rather than say, "Well, pick A over B."
That's right.
Yes.
And
so our focus here is trying to put some logic and some principles behind how that
might occur. And if we look at how that model works in different countries around
the world, it could be slightly different, but generally, is that recognition
because of the practicalities or difficulties of
making up time when you have a very short distance.
I understand that. Well, I guess what I'm saying, if put in health context, if
you've got a broken left leg and you've got a broken right leg, I don't really want
to prioritize between you-
Yeah
... and choose who gets their leg fixed first. I want them both fixed.
Yeah.
Okay. I'll forbear for a moment. I'll go to...
Well, okay. Go for Sapin. Is this Sapin, Tracy, or you? New area.
Okay. Well, I'll go. Simon is a Sapin, then Tracy is Sapin.
Thanks, Tracy.
And then I'll come back to you.
So just want to come back to this issue around productivity because
what you've proposed
essentially is that the government intervenes to
force ports to accept more domestic shipping slots
and prioritize it. That's all good.
Just want to come back to the role of technology.
What is your experience
in your interactions with other ports, whether it's Singapore or others,
where they're using AI or technology or productivity tools to
work through these matters, and what does it mean
New Zealand need to be thinking about in terms of labor force
flexibility in order for us to take advantage of those kind of tools?
I think there are some good examples.
Singapore you mentioned where whether it's AI or just other
technologies are now getting increasingly advanced at
avoiding the circumstance which often happens in shipping around the world where
people are basically racing
to get to the port, to get to the berth first.
And whether you're trying to avoid that from a fuel consumption
perspective or a port efficiency perspective or environmental
perspective,
the opportunity, of course, is that technology can help with that.
There are some good programs that are underway, that are being developed at the
moment. I think they're all in relatively early phases.
I note with interest and very encouraged to see that some of the funding from
the New Zealand Resilience Fund is also going into a similar
technology investigation here in New Zealand.
In terms of the impact with labor that you referenced
and touched on earlier as well,
of course, yes, we do see an increasing move to automated ports around the
world.
Mm-hmm.
Singapore is a good example of that
where automation is working very successfully.
Not in all places, but certainly it's a trend.
So just between
full automation and where we've got now,
where do you see the opportunities
for improving labor and worker productivity?
Is it in
more flexible working hours? Is it in relaxing
some of the
more stringent approaches to health and safety?
I know that has its own risks, but where do you see the opportunity for New
Zealand? Where should we be looking around
labor?
First and foremost, we're obviously not talking as port experts today.
Sure.
Our observations working in different ports of the world-
Yeah
... does a combination of all of those things.
Technology, whether it's fully automated ports or just using
technology to support general port practices.
Mm-hmm.
How the
containers are stacked in the yard and the optimization of that, how they move to
the ship side. All those sorts of things are very much in vogue
around the world, and I think it's encouraging to see some of the New Zealand ports
are getting on board as well. But I don't have a specific recommendation today on
how that can be approached.
Thank you. Tracy.
Thank you, Chair. Thank you.
It's
really interesting, and I am a big supporter of coastal shipping.
But the measures that you've recommended
obviously have been brought in in Australia.
Wasn't a--
I think it's fair to say that it didn't necessarily play out as well as it might
have been anticipated at the time.
So obviously, there's a chance for us to do things better, as you would hope when
you're a fast follower. Not so fast in this instance, but
have you gleaned any kind of insights from the
Australian experience that you would tweak those recommendations slightly?
Or...
I think we have looked at experienced working within the Australian
coastal
situation actually as an international operator.
Mm-hmm.
So a slightly different hat operating in Australia.
And that system works along the lines of effectively, if we are
carrying containers from port A to port B in Australia for domestic
Australian cargo, but we're part of an international service, that we are
required to effectively top up the wages of
our international crew to the Australian
standards.
And that is a system that's been working for some time.
We participate in that, and it's a model that could possibly be looked at in New
Zealand as well
if we were to put a framework around what we mean by MLOs carrying
incidental cargo.
Mm-hmm.
So that would be our experience in Australia.
Because
coastal shipping hasn't really grown to the levels that those measures were
anticipated in Australia.
Mm-hmm. Yep.
So we would want to do a better job, I should imagine.
Yeah. So I think like New Zealand, Australia has a road and rail network.
Obviously, it doesn't have the, well, apart from Tasmania on the mainland of
Australia, doesn't have the interisland aspect that we
do.But it is a
good example exactly of where we need to do things
differently. We need to take advantage of the dedicated coastal shipping companies
we have got, Pacifica being one, and make sure that they are
resilient moving forward.
Wow. A couple of questions from me.
Sure.
I'm conscious of time.
You've mentioned the ETS on a number of occasions, also the MARPOL
Annex, which that MARPOL definitely looked as though it was a voluntary thing that
we could or couldn't do. Is the ETS voluntary in terms of our
arrangements? Because effectively what you're saying is, if I'm an MLO
running from Auckland to Littleton, I don't pay ETS.
If I'm Pacifica running from Mons, the exact same route, I do.
Mm-hmm.
Is that something that we have to do or is that something which we can say, "Well,
actually, that's unhelpful.
We should have a level playing field here, so no, we're not going to do it
anymore."
We as in-
The same with MARPOL.
We as in, us?
We as in New Zealand Inc. decide to say, "Well, actually, no.
We actually kind of like having a coastal shipping service.
It's not reasonable to have a non-level playing field-
Mm-hmm
... and we're going to drop that."
I don't know the regulatory background to that to answer
that question,
but it's exactly the point that we are making.
It's one of the three cases of just the playing field
being uneven.
And there seem to be two solutions.
One is to apply ETS to the
foreign crews, who of course are
adding to the emissions in New Zealand.
If they carry more cargo, it adds more weight to the ship.
The ship then consumes more fuel. So the principles to me appear to be exactly the
same.
Mm-hmm.
So MARPOL is clearly voluntary is what you're saying, and so we could
make the call.
MARPOL is, but my understanding is that the
exemption to MARPOL at far is quite a different matter than
ETS. So even if MARPOL is excluded, it means that as a
coastal shipping company, there are various regulatory and
compliance things that we no longer need to do. But that doesn't address ETS.
No, and I understand. That's why I put this-
Yes. Correct
Just in terms of the,
we've seen the
MLOs coming and going to some degree.
Your view as to who actually makes the decisions, who actually holds the cards.
Because we've had people at times worried that shipping lines will
cease servicing New Zealand. And of course, we can say, "Well, look, we'll make
life tougher for them because we want to support coastal shipping." And then at
some point we are, "Oops-a-daisy," we've just now seen a number of
major shipping lines decided they don't want to service New Zealand, and the cost
of
getting products to and from New Zealand has gone up because we've done that.
There's less competition. It's probably not a great result for New Zealand Inc.
Any thoughts on,
we'd be reluctant to increase costs, which might
backfire.
Absolutely. We understand this. We need to protect New Zealand Inc.
first and foremost. But your initial question around
how are the decisions made.
Mm-hmm.
Our observation is they're typically made in offshore head offices that are
looking-
Okay
... at a global network.
And they would look at the operations in New
Zealand through the incremental income that can be earned versus the time
in ports. The time in ports then costs money because you have to spend more fuel
to make up that time.
So we've got to be a little bit careful is what you're saying.
I think that the intent of incremental in
Section 198, I think is the right intention.
Mm-hmm.
I think it's positive to have some incremental ability for these
international shipping companies to supplement domestic operators.
What we've seen, of course, has gone to the other extent now that has weakened
domestic operators quite considerably.
So I think the decisions are made offshore and it comes back to
the reliability point. What the customers are telling us is they need
certainty so they can arrange their supply chains, and what they
get from Pacifica is certainty. What they get from the MLOs
is patchiness
because they're in and they're out, depending on
global factors, not New Zealand factors.
Look, we have got time. Oh, Cindy, you've just arrived.
Just-
I'm sorry. I've not been so involved, but I did have one call.
Okay.
Can you tell me if it's been asked?
If we've already asked, I'll tell you. Yep. Okay, away you go.
It's really about the potential for the ocean flyers, the
electric
ferries, and how that fits in with any
strategies in the coastal sector.
I suspect the answer to that is it's probably marginally at very, very best, but
it's not really to freight.
Mm-hmm.
Not a meaningful way.
So this is only about freight?
Essentially, yes. Yeah.
Yes.
Why?
Because that is the focus we've got.
I mean, you look at all the organizations we're dealing with, it is really very
much about freight.
Yeah.
Because in terms of passenger
around the coast at the moment,
it's either very domestic and very regional, Auckland, that sort of thing,
or between the two islands. It's not what else.
Yeah, but I'm just looking for the future.
Yeah. No, that's-
They don't seem to be covering that.
That wasn't part of what we've been talking about at all.
Okay.
And certainly would not be in Squire's area.
Right. That's fine.
Right. Okay.
Thank you.
Cool. Look, thank you very much. Really appreciate it.
Is there any final things that you'd like to say, because I'm conscious of how far
you've gone?
Very briefly, Mr. Chair, I would just like to make a point.
I think
this is not about protectionism.
Right.
This is about creating a level playing field. That is absolutely critical.
And the three suggestions we made we think are all
pro-business. We think they're achievable in the short
term.
And
New Zealand is vulnerable. And the last thing that I want as a Kiwi,
and as a shipping CEO, is to be in a position where we don't have domestic coastal
shipping.
Mm-hmm.
The discussion about international coastal shipping is critical as well.
But I hope we've made the point today that in order for that to be successful
The domestic part needs to be successful as well.
Yeah. Mm-hmm.
Look, thank you so much.
Thank you.
We really appreciate it. If there are further questions, look, because as we
go through, we haven't quite finished, as I said, one group that we have not heard
from, or two groups we haven't heard from.
One's the union, so we'll deal with part of it today.
Hear part of that today. But the other is those major shipping lines, so we've
yet to hear from them. And there will inevitably be, as we go through our thinking,
we will come up with things which we, "Ah, we should have asked that."
Yeah.
We may well communicate the odd question or two, but we really appreciate that.
And if you do want to sit in on the next session, we welcome you as well.
Thanks very much.
Thank you.
Thank you all for coming. Thank you.
Right.
Okay. You about a moment?
Possibly.
Brief momentarily?
Momentarily.
Good. Thank you.
Right.
Okay, you are very welcome to stay if you want to.
Oh,
Hmm?
We've got a meeting to get to.
Talk to myself.
Sorry?
We've got a meeting in-
Oh. Well, no, I understand that. Yeah.
Okay.
I
don't
know
whether I'm coming or not.
Welcome.
Mm-hmm.
Thank you.
Lovely to have you all here. Thank you.
It's good that we've got this time set down.
Excuse me.
We've got
the initial submission that
you made, and we really appreciate that, so thank you very much.
So you can take that as read, but we'd always like you to highlight
some key points that you want to make.
Obviously do the intros as well,
so we know who's who.
And then, as you've probably realized, we like asking questions.
So over to you.
Excellent.
And we've got until,
what are we? It was 11:10.
So about 10 past 11, about.
Thank you very much.
Yeah, look, on behalf of the Maritime Union, thank you very much for having us.
It's not lost on us getting to speak in this forum.
We really appreciate it.
My name's Carl Finley. I'm the National Secretary of the Maritime Union of New
Zealand.
I've been in the role about 18 months now, elected.
I'm
really proud of
our union.
We hail back to 1872.
Mm.
So we've got a long and proud history of being in the
maritime industry.
When I got into the job,
well, it was identified all the way through,
while sitting in my role as president before I got into the national
secretary role,
how hammered our seafarers are getting.
So as pointed out earlier, our union represents seafarers and
wharfies, and that's how the union come together
in 2002.
So,
we wanted
to come up with an idea or
how we could actually help our seafarers, because our
view is that coastal shipping's in crisis.
And for the last
decades and decades of neglect as far as we're concerned.
So I really wanted to fight for our seafarers and put our best foot forward,
and push for our members
working on the coast, our domestic coast, and
highlight
the unnecessary competition between the wannabe cartel ports
running around the country.
So how we were going to go about all of this was
putting together our submission.
And I wanted us to paint the full picture, because
what was happening in the past, I think, in my view, was
that
we would get the ear of politicians, councilors,
community
employers, and they'd all agree with the issues that we were talking
about. But when you opened it right up,
it was too big a
piece of work, if you like, trying to pull all the pieces together.
So I wanted to go down the path,
as the new leader, to pull these pieces of the
puzzle together and paint the picture, and I think our
submission has done that.
But you can't do these things on your own, and
like I said earlier, I'm really proud of our submission and the work that we've put
together
with Mun's vision. But
to my left is Clint Smith, and to my right is Rob
Egan, and they were instrumental in putting this work
together and working for the Maritime Union of New
Zealand. I just want to thank you guys in front of this committee personally for
your work.
Thanks.
Fantastic, and I look forward to working with youse more in the future.
So as you've seen and you've read our
submission,
we're also really supportive in pushing for a hub and spoke model.
We didn't just put that submission in and sit on our
hands. We actually got out there, and we went out and spoke to people, got
support.
We went around, obviously,
political parties.
But we also got support off Kiwirail. You may have heard it from them.
We have.
Ports of Auckland, Lyttelton Port Company,
Three Islands Logistics,
and then the Shipping Federation. I see John here this morning.
The Maritime Association, Katai.
We even went as far to meet with
people from the Infrastructure Commission, and obviously Maritime New
ZealandWe've spoken to them about it.
And it goes without saying that
our comrades from the RMTU,
the Rail and Maritime Union, are very supportive of what we're trying to achieve
here. And the Amalgamated Workers Union,
big on infrastructure as you know, and the Dairy Workers Union
are
a big part of our
submission as well.
So what do we need and why we're here is that really
we need a government to have the courage to make the change.
I just heard we were talking about it a bit earlier.
And
it's coming whether we like it or not, and I guess you would have heard that by
quite a few speakers before us. And so why
don't we want to get in front of it and
make the rules and not have stuff forced upon us
by
overseas interests?
By way of introduction, that's all I've got to start with, and
I'd like to hand it over to Rob and Clint now.
The brains of the operation, so to speak.
To my car.
I think that doesn't sound like underpromising to me.
You set us up.
Don't let us down or you're not getting your next check.
Oh, no.
So you guys have obviously read through, you've heard from other submitters.
Our interest is coastal shipping.
We see the current state of the port system, and we look at it as a
system, not individual ports. We think that looking at it as individual ports
has marginal value. I mean-
Mm.
It needs to be looked at as
one entity. It's legislated the other way.
So basically,
our
perspective is
that having a whatever it is, 14 competitive ports
operating in New Zealand,
against each other in a market where you've got four
international players controlling
60% of container shipping,
that's creating
freedom of choice for international shipping lines, not for New Zealand
exporters or New Zealand ports or New Zealand industry.
We know from going through the submissions that have been made to
the select committee that there's a general sense that hub and spoke is
coming.
We have
immense concerns that
if we are not prepared for it in terms of having a domestic fleet
that can provide those spokes,
we are likely to see one of two
options. One will be greater use of truck
freight and hopefully rail freight, though rail freight is limited.
And we'll also see assets being stranded, and
ports that are nominally spokes but can't be
fed properly.
It's not a new problem. Anyone in the
industry, as Karl will say, we've talked to so many people in the industry.
They point to the same problems. You've got ports
duplicating resources.
From that you've then got the taxpayer duplicating resources, and that every
international port becomes a road end and a rail end.
We just think it's
inefficient. And our great concern is that
we've got a stake in this. Our members work in these ports.
Our concern is that some of them will lose their viability in the long term, and
that will hurt us as the union, our members, but also hurt the New
Zealand economy.
I guess you guys have probably heard from...
You said you haven't heard from the major shipping lines yet.
We were particularly interested in Maersk's
suggestion that
the protections are waived. It was
more or less for them to provide the spokes for us.
We don't see how further letting go of
regulatory control and control of our
supply chains even closer to our
regions is beneficial.
We very much think that we need a government
strategy that takes the ports, identifies
the correct
various hubs, the spokes, and invests or
creates a legislative environment in which domestic
capital can start providing those spokes and building its capacity
around that.
We have no fear of hub and spoke from a member
point of view. The freight's got to go where the freight's got to go
for our members. If they're taking it off an international flagged boat or if
they're taking it off a domestic coastal freighter, it's the same job.
I guess the last point is it's about resilience.
We've
had COVID. We're heading into this fuel crisis business.
Not having coastal shipping, not having a domestic coastal shipping that we can
actually manage and use strategically and plan with, I think
is
a distinct lack of resilience. And personally, I think it's
costing us as we speak in terms of the fuel
crisis. But Clint's been doing some work on that, haven't you?
Thank you. Thanks, Rob.
Sorry, Chair.
So for some time, MANS has been warning that
our underuse of coastal shipping is increasing New Zealand's fuel
vulnerability.
We're-For inter—
freight movements between regions in New Zealand, about 60% of that is
carried by truck, about 20% by coastal, 20% by
rail. 86% of the fuel used to move
stuff between regions is truck.
Shipping and rail use a quarter of the fuel
per tonne kilometer.
And those warnings are now hitting home.
As we face this fuel crisis,
we are burning more diesel than we need to be, and that
increases our vulnerability. The hub and spoke model,
as
others have said,
is coming, and if done wrong,
it increases that vulnerability.
If it
is a scenario where essentially the international shippers
decide where they want the hubs to be and drop off,
and
it is left to the market and it becomes trucking to
move the goods from those hubs to the regions,
then New Zealand will become further exposed to fuel shocks.
And
as we have seen, we're living in an increasingly vulnerable world where these
shocks are occurring with an increased
regularity. So,
we're doing some analysis now on the
potential diesel savings if
we
were able to do hub and spoke the right way and
use that to increase New Zealand's use of
coastal shipping to move that freight between regions,
rather than trucking. And we'll have those figures in a report in
the next couple of weeks. But it is dramatic and
every liter of
diesel that we can avoid burning in trucks by carrying
that fuel on coastal ships is lessening our exposure as an
economy to these shocks.
So,
yeah. Back to you.
Yeah. And we're reaping what we sow.
As a government, as a nation, we made some decisions in the '90s that have seen the
collapse of our coastal shipping.
We failed to recognize what would happen, or perhaps we didn't care.
I don't know. I was a very young man then.
But
we are now, with this shift to hub and spoke, with this shift
to larger drafting boats and with
international companies
looking at us as a small and potentially
irrelevant market,
we don't really want to be making the same mistakes again.
Which is again, why we're looking at
a strategy. And I guess we're ready for questions now.
Thank you.
Yeah.
I always like strategy.
Right. I think I had Simon first, then Tangi. Right.
And I'll put myself on if there's nobody else. So, Simon.
Oh, thank you. Look, really helpful submission, and really
helpful just to hear about all the connections that you've made and the things
you've tried to bring together in your interaction.
I'm interested in this concept of
14 ports
and how you see a reorganization
or economical structural reform playing out.
Because while I think we've seen a case made for local government reform,
for water services reform that involves gelling up
a whole range of fragmented players in a sector into
more cohesive units.
How do you see that playing out in practice, and what
advice would you give to, say, government policymakers about how to
approach that problem?
We
think that,
effectively, obviously it has to be government directed.
There are issues in the Ports Act with a requirement that ports act
competitively, which exposes them to cartel or if they act cooperatively,
those legislative changes need to be made.
Obviously, when you're doing something like this, you risk creating monopolies, so
you need a good regulator.
We,
as a starting model, and we recognize that this is flawed, but we have
greater confidence in the current regulators in the space
in terms of Maritime New Zealand.
You need some way of regulating that market.
Ultimately, that's going to go to the Commerce Commission.
But on the day-to-day basis, we'd think something along the
lines of the way the Electricity Commission works, but
that works. And that's pretty much,
yeah, we recognize there's risks, but effectively we're looking at risks
of potential monopolies with some of these ports anyway,
so.
Okay. Follow-up question, Stu.
So I ask this question, I've asked some of the other submitters this
question as well. Where do you see the role of technology playing in our ability to
improve productivity?
Well, we've had automation. We've seen it go up and
fail in Auckland.
Yeah.
The general sort of consensus when we've talked to internationals that deal with
much larger ports that have implemented automation, we don't
have scale for that. Our ports aren't the size to make that
efficient. We have very efficient ports.
Actually, Clint, you did the automation
stuff, have it?
Yeah.
So a couple of years ago, I was commissioned to do a report on the
failure of the automation project at Ports of Auckland
by MUNZ and the International Transport Workers Federation.
Right.
It found there was a myopic focus on this
idea that automation was going to lead to more productivity.
Ports of Auckland
had been ranked the best port in Oceania
before this project. Four hundred million dollars down the drain, three deaths
that are associated with the
failure of automation, because as
the automation project failed, the pressure went on workers to move faster to
make up for it. And we saw the tipping of the crane,
the death there.
Real tragedies, tragedies that shouldn't happen on a modern port,
driven by a bonus system that was
encouraging those-
So if you could just help reframe it into my-- My question was-
Sure
... where do you see the opportunities?
Mm.
Because I think we've all internalized that failure.
Yeah.
We understand it.
Well-
So what's the next thing we should be thinking about?
How do we take advantage of AI and automation at a scale and level that's
appropriate?
I think to do that, you need to be starting to look at a systemic view of this port
as a system first, I think.
Yeah.
Honestly, looking at things like AI and automation on a port-by-port
basis, given the failures we're seeing in the system-
Mm
... is marginal and it's fiddling at the edges.
Okay.
I can't see a--
And it's the same with labor flexibility, things like that.
We've heard a bit of that.
Mm.
That is all just fiddling at the edges, when
you've got the systemic issue that you have now.
Okay, thank you. Really helpful.
Can I just suck off that Tangiwai before I go to you?
One thing we have seen is, and it's mostly Tauranga,
is starting to acquire operations in other ports.
Is that prospectively a model that
some ports start effectively owning the other ports?
So at least you've got a
more coherence about how they're operating together rather than
all of
them operating separately.
Yes and no. They're operating this way guided
by a different set of interests necessarily than you'd have at
an overview level.
I guess you could see the market
delivering a sort of hub and spoke that way.
But at the same time, when you've got
a reasonably determined effort from
offshore shippers to push us into a hub and spoke,
then
I'd rather not take the risk of-
Yeah. No, I was thinking more of that-
... just leaving it that way
... a mechanism, having decided that's what you're going to do, because obviously
most of them are local authority owned, and therefore you'd have to compel
that if you were going to go down that track.
You would. And that's actually one of the difficulties we
discovered in the work we've been doing across the sector, and so
did the Commerce Commission, actually.
I mean, not the Commerce Commission, the Infrastructure Commission, when they were
looking at ports, is that sort of fragmented
ownership model where you have a variety of different models, some public,
some private, some listed, some unlisted,
makes it very difficult to actually get a decent sense of what's going on across
the industry, which in turn
means it's difficult to plan. And all of these ports are planning, obviously, but
they're planning within the confines of their own operations.
Mm.
Thanks. Tangiwai.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thanks, Carl, Clinton,
and Rob for the work that you've done.
And I just want to acknowledge the comment that you made about
engaging with what seems to be a very wide range of
stakeholders in getting to this point, which I think is not something that we
often get from submitters, who often have a
particular view, and that's that.
But going broad and broadly, I think it does need to be acknowledged.
Mm.
And also acknowledging the
kind of
role around a port strategy that you're calling for there,
and that government need to lead on that rather than it just kind of ad hoc
happening.
And so the first question for me is what you see as the initial first steps
around that in terms of if the government was to head
down that path, what would be the immediate steps?
But the other question is,
that to one side, what sort of economic information
is needed to inform a decision around hub and spoke?
So
out there, that community and stakeholders think this is
a good path to head down. But on the other side, what's sort
of informing from an economics perspective that
this has some legitimacy?
Well, that kind of touches on what I just mentioned, which is
it's a very difficult area to get a clear analysis
of because the nature of the various
organizations and the various
ways they are shaped.
But there is some pretty basic stuff that leads all the
way out from the ports into-- I mean, that has its impact
on, let me rephrase that.
You can't just look at the ports. You also have to look at the fact that the ports
are effectively the start of our
freight transport sector. They determine not just coastal
shipping, they determine road and rail hubs.
Those decisions in terms of road and rail then flow on to passenger transport.
They're fundamentally something you need to get right,
and that you need to understand. Clint is
a bit of an expert on this sort of stuff.
He's got a good idea, I think, of the sort of things that you would want to be
taking into account.
Yeah. So we've drafted sort of terms of reference for what
a proper study of
going towards a hub and spoke model would look like.
It's beyond the resources of MINZ and myself
to work that out, and we wouldn't have the ability to get
information out of some of those stakeholders like the ports and
that the government would. But we really need
to have government
Um, model out the options around hub and
spoke, how it would blend in with the other modes.
So we have put together some terms of reference,
but
to do that modeling is beyond our capacity.
But we do think there's huge potential here for hub and
spoke to be a game changer for coastal shipping, and
it's got the potential to go the other way if it's not done right.
And one of the things we think that the committee should recommend is that
this modeling is done. We're happy to hand over the work we've
done on it so far.
We can't-
You'd be happy to hand that over, you say?
Yeah.
Look, I think we will definitely ask you to, and I echo what Tanguy said,
the fact that you've engaged with so many parties, and it's like going-- you're
sort of almost shadowing the parties that we've engaged with as well.
So, congratulations for doing it. A couple of questions from me.
Just in terms of the-- You've made quite a number of comments about the investment
that ports have made, and this is in your submission,
in things which have turned out not to be particularly helpful.
And then also the
risk that as ships get bigger,
we've got ports trying to chase the bigger ships.
Some of them can't, some of them won't because they simply know they can't.
There's no point. But others might.
When you look at the
ports that there are, is there also a risk that we end up
being, and here I particularly think of the South Island, but not only.
So you've got Lyttelton and Chalmers in particular.
Do you end up with that situation? It's actually saying we do want two.
I know Lyttelton would like to be the only one, but we do want two, and
part of the reason we want two is that if something goes wrong with one of them,
and it doesn't take much, it might even be the railway line falls apart on the way
there. It might be there's an earthquake, whatever it might be.
That then suddenly you're going, "Whoopsie daisy, we haven't got a port that's got
the
container facilities to be able to service
the whole South Island," for example.
The whole South Island, yeah.
So
does the model need to take into account resilience and some choice in there as
well?
We
think so. But as Clint indicated, we're a small union
with limited resources.
Yeah.
That's probably beyond the margin of what we could actually
credibly advise on.
Yeah.
Resilience is becoming a greater issue for all
transport systems around the world and-
It certainly is.
Yeah. And so, the issue currently is that
we manage our port system in a very different way than we manage our
other
transport networks in the country.
We have one rail network. We have a roading
system that is run with a plan from the top down, and
we're trying to
organize our port systems essentially as if they were islands, which they're
not. So
rather than trying to optimize-- each port trying to optimize its
own financial situation, we can look at what's best for New Zealand as a whole,
and that's not only a cost thing, it's a resilience thing as well.
Yeah, cool.
Just, you heard the question I asked earlier, which is to go to a different issue.
This whole thing of we get ships which come out of window, et cetera,
trying to get them serviced quickly.
In terms of there's a role that ports play, there's a role that you guys play.
I've heard from some of the ports saying that some of the practices
are, how shall we say,
constrained.
My job is this, can't go and do anything else.
Sometimes I've got to have a union manager on top of
the non-union manager. The port's manager, the union's manager, then the staff,
the workers.
Are there things that the unions can do, not just yourself,
but all the unions can do to try and make the port system more flexible, more
efficient?
Because otherwise that flows through to the cost of shipping and flows through,
essentially, to New Zealand Inc.
I think you've got to recognize that each port is a
negotiation between parties, and that sometimes that
negotiation's done entirely in good faith, and sometimes it's not on behalf of
the-- on the employer's side. I think in Ports of Auckland, we work
very closely, and we have a role in the ongoing governance
of the port, and that's worked well.
I think in other areas,
anecdotal evidence,
stories like that are probably
equally represented on the other side and that that's more industrial
relations than it is of
port efficiency.
I guess the question I'm asking is if we're saying to ports, "Hey, we want you
guys to be more efficient." We're saying to the
unions, "We need you guys to be more efficient as well.
We need a system that actually works for New Zealand Inc." Is that that?
Well, we've done that in conjunction with the Ports of Auckland, haven't we?
And it's worked very well.
Yeah, I believe so. It's a way better model,
way better way of working now than what we had in
2012, so to speak.
We're working together. They're in a tripartite system with the
council and work very closely with the management there.
And if that continues, well, I think there is a
real appetite for unions to work closely-
I think port's better
... with companies,
stevedoring companies, and
there is certainly from the maritime unions' perspective.
One of the things following from that is that we've certainly heard
desire to have some clear
indicators of efficiency that everybody-- because people are using different
measures for efficiency.
And the model, certainly Port of Auckland.
Port of Auckland seems to have done fantastically.
Most of the others are saying they're not.So clearly there's some argument there.
If you've got some clear parameters that say, "This is what an efficiency measure
is." If Auckland turns out and goes, "It's great."
That's exactly right.
If Auckland turns out and it goes, "It's not great," then that model's not looking
so clever.
That's exactly right. You look at the dividends they're returning
compared to what they were.
What waddle.
You look at the windows. If the
ship comes in on a window, leaves on its window.
There's all sorts of things, there's all sorts of measures out there.
The containers across the berth,
I'm not so sure that's the best model.
It certainly needs to be in there, but it needs to be in conjunction with a whole
lot of things.
What is the best model?
The numbers that we were hitting during the Tony
Gibson era,
look what that led to. A lot of death and destruction.
No, I'm interested in-
So-
What is the best model? The best measure.
Well,
I don't honestly know. But all I know is that
if the ship's coming in on its window and it's leaving on its
window, there's something in that.
If no one's getting hurt,
everyone's going home after their shift, there's something in that.
And what are we comparing ourselves to here?
So-
I think the comparisons that we're getting, and I'll go to you, Tracey, the
comparisons we're getting are between ports and how
efficient they are, whatever that measure of efficiency might be, but
also between New Zealand ports and ports internationally-
Yeah
... and how they stack up.
So I think the best way of answering your question from my
experience, and I've been in the industry for 24 years now,
is that when a shipper comes in, they want to know
what they're going to get. So they want to know if they're going to get it, and
they're going to get it consistently.
So if we can supply a consistent level of productivity, that's
what they want.
So I'll just add-- Yeah, go on.
And so that's what we need to work on to give them.
Now, what the best model is for that,
whether you're working out rosters or contracts or whatever else, that's the
ongoing issue, and we'll get there one day, I'm
sure. But at the moment, I think one of the best models
is probably the ports of Auckland.
So look, I'll just finish off and then I'll go to Tracey.
And that is because you mentioned several times, if they come on time, if they come
into their window, they leave in their window.
But what we're hearing is that quite often that they can't.
Now, it's not necessarily-
Well, if a window's booked, in my opinion, the port company should then go-
Yeah
... be strong and kick them out. Keep those out and let them in on the-
Yeah. The problem is that has a cost, has a
real significant cost. And we've heard that in spades from lots of the other
submitters. Question is if we end up with ships out a window,
for whatever reason it might be, and they're then sitting waiting in that queue,
and you heard the Squire before you,
who I know some of their people are your people as well.
But if they're sitting out of that window and we can't turn them
around quickly, there is a cost, and it's a cost which reverberates right through
the New Zealand economy. How do we fix that, is my question to you.
Well, we've got to work on it together.
Simple as that.
Identify the problem. This high performance, high engagement works well at Ports of
Auckland, and we try to identify the issues, sit down and discuss them at the
table,
and then work it out together, rather than
a manager or coming up with a decision that the union members
don't like and then just push back against.
They need to work together and come up with a...
Because it is all about we don't want the ships to go away.
We know that's our work.
So we want the ships to come in. We want more to come in.
So we need to embrace it and sit down and
talk together.
Thanks. I'll go to Tracey then to cap things off.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. That was very prescient because that was exactly what my
question was going to be about. We often hear about efficiency and productivity,
but part of the fourth strategy has to
involve a collaborative approach to what that looks like.
And I was going to ask specifically about high performance, high engagement, noting
that the Ports of Auckland could be an example of that, and the CEO
there previously was at Lyttelton.
And we, as a Lyttelton local, certainly noticed the difference when
that change of management
took that culture away and transported it essentially to Auckland.
Thank you.
Yeah. And noting also that therefore, the subsequent
changes to the foreman role at Lyttelton was a bit of a failed
experiment in creating efficiency without really defining
what that means
in consultation and in collaboration with the workforce.
So my question being, as part of that overall port strategy, you
would see,
I should imagine, a very good role for workers in
ensuring that that strategy
was well put together and not something that was just theoretical.
Well, the best thing about the high performance, high engagement, I think, is that
the workforce is seen as an asset and not an
impediment to the business.
And that changes a lot of mindsets,
and they get a lot more buy-in from what you're trying to achieve.
So I think that's a key part of it, absolutely.
They've been able to have that engagement.
And I should imagine that that also feeds into those
definitions of what efficiency is and all of
the other ways that you might want to quantify something.
We've been in search of the elusive productivity gains for as long as I can
remember.
Not just in ports, either.
Not just in ports, but everywhere.
And at some point, you'd need to operationalize those
in some way that makes sense.
Yes.
So I'm assuming that's kind of what you're advocating for as well.
Thank you. Simon.
Oh, thanks. It's come up in a number of different forums, and
when I've had the opportunity to go on board
one of the Pacific ships and down at Port of Auckland, it was pretty obvious that
in terms of the crew
age and stage of life,
a lot of them are getting on, and particularly thinking about the
Kiwis who are engineers and
have a lot of that experience.
How do you
think government should respond to this issue of an
agingWorkforce and the need to bring more skills on from a
seafarer point of view. And what do you think we should be thinking
about in terms of bringing more workers in
to the port side, and what barriers might there
be?
We ran the stats on this last year out of our membership database,
which of course isn't just for members, it's also casuals.
Mm-hmm.
And discovered that New Zealand has more
able-bodied seafarers over the age of 70 working-
Yeah
... than under the age of 30.
That's something we've taken very seriously for a long time.
One of the things that we have done recently is, jointly with
the Shipping Federations,
instigated a training opportunity, one of-
The Maritime Association.
And the Maritime
Association.
The Marine Association.
What we saw, what we identified was the
issue isn't getting people trained, it's getting them time
on board a ship.
Mm-hmm.
And so you were seeing schools limited by the number of
training berths available within New Zealand.
You were seeing people getting their training in Australia and never coming back.
Yeah.
Things like that. So with the Federation and the Marine
Association, we made an application to the, is it the
Resilience Fund? What's the name?
Yes. Yeah.
The Coastal Shipping Resilience Fund to actually subsidize training
berths to create those spaces for that workforce.
And that's one small but quite significant thing.
I think it's generated about 64 additional training berths-
Okay
... since it's been operational. There are other things that can be done as well,
but again,
it's very much part of a system where all the parts fit together.
Your port strategy,
your training, your provision of capital-
Mm
... all of that. And there's a whole lot of moving parts-
Okay
... that really very few players outside of the
government have the oversight to put in place.
Mm.
Okay, we'll stop on that.
Yeah.
Have you
had any interaction with the industry skills board that's been
established that covers your sector?
Yeah, sit on a committee
along with John and quite a few other people, and
we've all been putting in submissions and all part of that group and have
discussions.
Okay.
On what the best way forward. The Maritime Union also
works very closely
with the Maritime Union of Australia.
We're in a federation, and they've got the Strategic Fleet
Initiative with their government that they're working on.
And
so
they also work obviously with the Maritime Union
of, sorry, the AMSA,
the equivalent of Maritime New Zealand.
And obviously, we obviously talk quite
closely about getting berths or training guys and
aligning our
rules and regulations to try and make things easier.
Okay.
Because what we know too is that there is a lot of Kiwis that leave for Australia
that have the skills that we actually need here.
Mm.
But the Kiwis always want to come home too.
But they've got to have jobs to get back here and vessels to get on.
Mm.
They go to Australia because it's great and they chase the money for a little bit
of time, but then they want to come home.
And we want those guys to come back so we see that it could be a really good
flow of skilled
Kiwis and Aussies switching over,
working
for the betterment of New Zealand.
Yeah. So Mr. Chair, just to clarify, so you see some opportunities for alignment
between the regulatory regime in Australia and New Zealand?
That's what we're hoping for, but there's a lot of work to be done in that space.
Yeah.
Obviously, as you're aware, it's very complicated, but that's not stopping us from
having a go-
No
... at trying to get-
Okay
... interest.
And just in terms of the strategic fleet concept, which is a new concept for me,
and I understand there's a lot of focus on supply chain risk and trying to manage
that risk down at the moment.
Rather than New Zealand starting its own strategic fleet, which might not feel that
strategic with just two ships, if that's what we get to, do you think there's an
opportunity for us to actually collaborate and participate in Australia's
strategic fleet ambition?
Well, my view is, is whatever it takes.
We're very close to Australia, obviously.
It makes sense that we work closer together
in this space.
Mm-hmm.
But whatever it takes to help make it work,
and get it off the ground,
we're all happy to look at, I'm sure everyone around here would be too.
Okay.
We also don't see
shifting to a hub and spoke strategy and
the flow on from that in terms of developing coastal shipping
fleet development-
Mm
... training as being
antithetical to that. If we were to be working with Australia
closely in that space, we'd need to be bringing something to the table, so.
And what do you think that is, that we'd need to bring?
Well, it would be useful if we actually
had some boats.
Yeah. Our capacity's collapsed in the last 30 years,
and
admittedly, our relationship with Australia is much better, but we
still think there's the space to have some control and management over our
own ships.
One of the stats you had, mate, was in the '90s, we had 34 vessels out there.
Now in 2026-
Wow
... we've got one container vessel.
Mm.
And this is while much of the freight that was being
carried as bulk breaking over that time has become containerized as well, so.
Okay.
Exactly.
All right. Thank you very much.
Three question areas from me just to finish off with, unless anybody else has got
any other.
The first one was you talked about the 1990s.
What were the changes that were made?
And obviously, there was a range of different types of
shipping that was
Operating was just clearly wasn't containers, but just
for some-
Oh, it was primarily-
Just tell us a little bit of history.
Primarily 198s. The ability being
the provision for the ability for international transhipping.
So that work, that is containers though, isn't it, actually? Yeah.
Yeah. So, effectively it was what's
run New Zealand shipping, in particular its containerized shipping down, is the
fact that it is, the last submitters will say, competing with
transhipping from offshore companies that can afford to
eat a loss,
paying rates that are considerably lower than the rates New Zealand companies
pay, that don't have the same regulatory expectations
or requirements, that are operating out of tax
havens. There's-
Yeah. No, I've got those. Was there anything else that was going on there as well
in terms of other product other than containers being used significantly
by
using coastal shipping?
I think,
it was before my time.
Internationally, we've seen
more goods containerized,
things that were palletized, things that came in bulk break.
You're seeing
milk powder shipped by container now. You're seeing logs.
Ironically,
where there's been a surplus of empties, people are dropping logs in them and
shipping them as container freight.
It's-
Yeah, dangerous too.
It is
dangerous. I think they stick the thing on its end and then put the logs in though.
Right.
There's all
sorts of hacks going on. And again, it speaks to an industry that's kind of all
over the show.
Yeah. Okay. Second one is you mentioned engaging with the Infrastructure
Commission.
Now, obviously Infrastructure Commission's interested in all sorts of
infrastructure. And you particularly talked about road and rail and so on.
Mm-hmm.
Can you just tell us a little bit about what the thinking was that you got from
them in terms of
that conversation that you were having?
How you going, mate?
Yeah, initially our first
contact with them was Carl got in touch with them after-
Ravine
... after the plan came out, because
ports were so lightly touched on,
which we thought was unusual given the role they play in
basically instructing a whole lot of other infrastructure.
We
met with them, we briefed them
on this stuff. We talked to them about the ports.
They expressed to us that they have difficulty
with that for exactly the same reasons we've talked about.
I think-
So they had difficulty with-
They have difficulty coming to an assessment,
because information is not as readily available out of the sector because of the
fragmented ownership models and
competitive caveats and stuff like that.
So,
I think they'd be very happy if the government did some modeling of this,
so that to give... I suspect they'd probably be able to do more, but we can't speak
on their behalf.
No, we can't. But what I can say,
and just to add, is that they were very encouraging
of us pushing down, with our submission, pushing down, and they like
what they've seen and-
On the-
They like what they've seen in our submission, and they were very encouraging to us
to carry on pushing
down the way we were with it. So they like
what they were reading.
I think there's an acknowledgement there's a
missing piece of work at the systems level in this industry that needs to be done,
and yeah.
Okay.
I know from Rebecca that they sort of wanted us to do a little bit more
digging, but again, we are a small-- You want
limited resources.
We can. That spade work has been very helpful.
Yeah.
Okay. I think I did have one other question, but,
and I can't remember what it was,
so look, I will leave that one there.
But I'm-
Sorry.
Oh, Mike, you go on. And then I might remember my other question.
You go on.
Time.
Lyttelton Port, which obviously is absent, publicly owned by the
council. Now, just a wee while ago, there was obviously they're looking at
doing an $800 million investment a wee while ago.
There was discussions around DP World coming in to fill that
space. What type of impact, I guess, would it have
on the port sector in New Zealand if actually we started, and workers,
if we started seeing these publicly owned ports,
bringing in private partners at that extent?
Well, we've noted that in our submission, and it was part of the reason we
campaigned so heavily in Port Auckland against having a private operator come
in.
From our perspective, there are issues with changes of
management. There always are. They always want to do something different.
There's the union member on site industrial relations
perspective. But from the strategic perspective,
just as the Infrastructure Commission has difficulty trying to map the area because
of the various ownership models, the difficulty in
regulating towards a single strategy for our ports that was in the interest
of our country,
would become much harder if you've got ports being operated under
30-year licenses by the likes of DP World,
and more expensive. So, it basically, a
decision like that is a decision that has a
generational impact
on your ability to manage your assets
as a country.
We did some analysis of the Ports of Auckland proposal,
and
for that overseas operator to make a return on
equity that they would expect, they were going to have to increase the
revenue out of that port by tens of millions of dollars a year,
and that ultimately flows through to New Zealand businesses.
It's
Kiwi companies that are paying the port fees one way or another.
And we've seen that in Australia effectively.
Yeah.
Effectively what happens is they come in highly leveraged and-
Sweep the assets
Sweep the assets within what's effectively a regional monopoly.
Yeah. Look, I think I have sort of vaguely thought about what the other area
of question I was going to ask, which is the whole issue of reporting and
transparency of these. We've already canvassed the
issue of what a
measure of efficiency might be, but it seems that
when we're looking at the ports,
and how they're performing, there's a whole range of...
Well, some of them are more transparent than others in terms of the amount of
information that's available. If there was greater
transparency about how they were operating,
how parts of the business were operating, because it seems that some ports
sort of are saying, "Well, we want to do all these things,
because we want to do all these things." And some bits of the business will be
cross-subsidizing other bits of the business and so on.
If there's more transparency in that, do you start ending up with ports doing
what they should be doing,
as opposed to effectively, in many cases, operating off the ratepayers' balance
sheet
and doing things which they want to do, whether they should be doing them or not
doing them?
I don't think we've got any problem at all with additional transparency.
I think where you strike it from a regulatory point of view is what you do with
privately owned
ports that are not listed.
They ironically tend to be the ones which are the most transparent
because they've got to report.
It's the ones that aren't.
Yeah.
I think we'd agree that
greater consistency and transparency of reporting is going to be very important.
How are you going to have a national port strategy if you don't have a
good concept of
what the ports are up to and what they need to do to fulfill their role
within that New Zealand? Okay. Look, I think we're both
done time-wise, and also
in terms of the questions which we want to ask at the moment.
So I really thank you very much for giving us the time.
Thank you for all the work that you've done, which I think is above and beyond.
So well done. Thank you for that. I think that if you've got those
reports that you're willing to share, we'd be very grateful for that.
As I said, we've certainly got the main shipping
lines. We've got one or two others we'd like to talk to.
The other union's one of those. And it may well be as
we go through all the things that we've amassed over the last,
what is it now?
Six months.
Six months or so, that we may well have the odd question that we want to ask.
So if we do fire the odd question back to you and say, "Hey,
we've thought about this.
What do you think of this?" Then we'd appreciate the answers to that
as well.
We're available anytime.
Thank you. We really appreciate it.
Thank you very much for your invitation.
Thank you so much. Thank you.
Okay, so now go to the final mark.
Yep